=== 12. Al-Bari | الْبَارِئُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-bari/

AL-BARI MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Bari
(The Evolver / The Maker)
The Maker, The Creator who has the Power to turn the entities.
Al-Baari (in Arabic: ٱلْبَارِئُ) is the one who decreed things to exist out of nothing in a specific manner. Creates shape from nothing that has no model or similarity. He manifests His creations in perfect harmony and in perfect proportions without any faults.
Mentions of Al-Bari:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Roots:
From the root ba-ra-hamza (ب ر أ), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to create, to form out of nothing, to manifest, to create using pre-existing matter, evolve, to be individual free and clear of another thing, to be free and clear of fault or blemish.
Names of creating:
As we mentioned in the name
Al-Khaliq
(the creator), He also has two similar names Al-Bari (the producer or the maker), and Al-Musawwir (the fashioner). These names may seem synonymous with Allah's ability to invent or create. But they are distinct and offer unique shades of meaning, bringing out different aspects to Allah's creating of creation. For example, these three names are often said to represent an order to His creation. First, you have Al-Khaliq, The Creator. He who produces something from nothing, i.e., He plans and creates. Secondly, He is Al-Bari, The Producer - the one who initiates and brings into existence. Lastly, He is Al-Musawwir, The Fashioner - He organizes and shapes the arrangement of the creation.
What's amazing is these names are followed in this exact sequence based on their meaning in the following ayah:
هُوَ
ٱللَّهُ
ٱلۡخَٰلِقُ
ٱلۡبَارِئُ
ٱلۡمُصَوِّرُۖ
لَهُ
ٱلۡأَسۡمَآءُ
ٱلۡحُسۡنَىٰۚ
يُسَبِّحُ
لَهُۥ
مَا
فِي
ٱلسَّمَٰوَٰتِ
وَٱلۡأَرۡضِۖ
وَهُوَ
ٱلۡعَزِيزُ
ٱلۡحَكِيمُ
Huwal Laahul Khaaliqul Baari ‘ul Musawwir; lahul Asmaaa’ul Husnaa; yusabbihu lahoo maa fis samaawaati wal ardi wa Huwal ‘Azeezul Hakeem
English Translation:
"He is Allah, the Creator, the Inventor, the Fashioner; to Him belong the best names. Whatever is in the heavens and earth is exalting Him. And He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise."
— (
Qur'an 59:24
)
A useful analogy:
Imam al-Ghazali compares these three names to the process of constructing a house. You have the planner, the builder, and the designer who gives it its final shape. Similarly, Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ takes on the three roles - the creator, producer, and the fashioner. However, the difference is we are not really inventing. Only Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ creates and He does so on an unimaginable scale. He creates from nothingness, whereas we are merely finding ways to transform material from one form to another. We are limited in what we can make, whereas Allah's creation is unbounded.
Here you can read other verses which do not contain the name Al-Bari but further describe Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ as being the best of creators.
ٱلَّذِي
خَلَقَكَ
فَسَوَّىٰكَ
فَعَدَلَكَ
Allazee khalaqaka fasaw waaka fa’adalak
English Translation:
"Who created you, proportioned you, and balanced you?"
— (
Qur'an 82:7
)
Reflection:
At times, we may feel insecure with our physical traits, but Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ tells us in the Qur'an that we've been created in the best moulds.
لَقَدۡ
خَلَقۡنَا
ٱلۡإِنسَٰنَ
فِيٓ
أَحۡسَنِ
تَقۡوِيمٖ
Laqad khalaqnal insaana fee ahsani taqweem
English Translation:
"Verily, We created man of the best stature (mould),"
— (
Qur'an 95:4
)
Start with Acceptance:
This is a reminder that we should be thankful to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ for the vessel He has granted us. We can not change it, nor should there be a desire to. Instead, we should learn to love it, look after it, and accept it for what it is. This process doesn't happen overnight; there's no guilt in not feeling great immediately. But, through studying deen, we understand Allah's attributes of how He is all-Knowing, doesn't make mistakes, and that He is the best of creators. We must then examine our insecurities and put them under a microscope. Here we will find that we are all perfectly imperfect. As a physical creation of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ we are designed perfectly; He created us how He intended. The suffering we experience in our self-image is of the mind, and this differs from reality. The ways we are imperfect are through our actions and the way we treat ourselves. These actions can erode self-respect and dignity - perhaps on a subconscious level. But, if we are honest, we can figure out what may be causing our unhappiness/uneasiness and seek to better ourselves. We don't have to deny our weaknesses; instead, we should embrace them. The Qur'an even tells us, "man was created weak." (
Qur'an 4:28
).
وَتَرَى
ٱلۡجِبَالَ
تَحۡسَبُهَا
جَامِدَةٗ
وَهِيَ
تَمُرُّ
مَرَّ
ٱلسَّحَابِۚ
صُنۡعَ
ٱللَّهِ
ٱلَّذِيٓ
أَتۡقَنَ
كُلَّ
شَيۡءٍۚ
إِنَّهُۥ
خَبِيرُۢ
بِمَا
تَفۡعَلُونَ
Wa taral jibaala tahsabuhaa jaamidatanw wa hiya tamurru marras sahaab; sun’al laahil lazeee atqana kulla shai’; innahoo khabeerun bimaa taf’aloon
English Translation:
"And you see the mountains, thinking them rigid, while they will pass as the passing of clouds. [It is] the work of Allah, who perfected all things. Indeed, He is Acquainted with that which you do."
— (
Qur'an 27:88
)
Changing the goal:
The journey starts with love. There will be less of an internal conflict to do the things you already know you should be doing the day you revitalize the love of self. It's hard to detach or untangle our current aspirations from what society has been telling us is important as it becomes indoctrinated. But this does not always align with what Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ loves to see in His servant. This is what it means to be fooled by the worldly life - the cars, the money, beauty standards, fame, or popularity. All these are superficial. You don't need to define yourself by these values.
Instead, you can rewrite your story for confidence to be defined by your loving nature, piousness, devotion to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ, your compassion, your mercy, your wisdom, your family values, and/or your hard-working and resourceful nature. Notice how all these are internal values that occur at the individual level. It doesn't involve other people or require an outwardly show of something. There is no competition with others. This makes it less glamorized and promoted in culture, as there's nothing for them to sell you and to make a profit on. If anything, perfecting oneself can make others feel inferior, so it's looked down on.
Narrated Ibn Abbas: that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: "Love Allah for what He nourishes you with of His Blessings, love me due to the love of Allah, and love the people of my house due to the love of me."
[1]
References:
[1]
Hasan (Darussalam) Jami` at-Tirmidhi 3789
