=== 16. Al-Wahhab | الْوَهَّابُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-wahhab/

AL-WAHHAB MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Wahhab
(The Supreme Bestower)
The One who is abundantly generous in giving without ever needing to calculate.
Allah is Al Wahhab (in Arabic: ٱلْوَهَّابُ), which means the great giver whose blessings are freely and perpetually given. He gives with no purpose and expects nothing in return. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is truly the most liberal giver, He gives to the deserving and undeserving, to the good and the evil.
Mentions of Al-Wahhab:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root waw-ha-ba (و ه ب), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to give for no compensation, to give as a gift, to donate, to offer as a present, to bestow, or to give liberally and freely.
The gift of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ:
The name Al-Wahhab is mentioned three times in the Qur'an and comes from
al-hibah,
which is a gift detached without conditions or prior cause. This name speaks to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ nature of being the all endowering, all bestowing, or the perpetual giver of gifts. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ loves His creation intimately, He gives without recompense or interests. In
Surah Ibrahim verse 34
, "And if you should count the favor of Allah, you could not enumerate them. Indeed, mankind is [generally] most unjust and ungrateful."
Give yourself a moment to reflect, look all around you, look at the complexity of your body. We can not show enough appreciation to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ for all of His blessings. The gift of life, how each cell everyday is at war, it wards off viruses and bacteria that want to destroy it. Yet here you are. Every moment we are living and its because Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has written it to be that way. He sustains us in every moment and we are unaware and unknowing.
أَمۡ
عِندَهُمۡ
خَزَآئِنُ
رَحۡمَةِ
رَبِّكَ
ٱلۡعَزِيزِ
ٱلۡوَهَّابِ
Am'indahum khazaaa inu rahmati Rabbikal Azeezil Wahhab
English Translation:
"Do they possess the treasures of your Lord, the Most Mighty, the Great Bestower?"
— (
Qur'an 38:9
)
The pairing with the name Al-Wahhab:
When the names of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ are paired it often conveys a greater message. In this case, the names
Al-Azeez
(The Exalted / The Mighty) is paired with Al-Wahhab. This signals the purity of the gift. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is The All Mighty, He does not need anything, so when He gives, He gives freely. There is no ulterior motive, no looking to get in someone's favor. Unlike humans, we understand there's an unspoken social contract to reciprocate the giving. If someone invites you to their wedding, you feel almost compelled or obligated to invite them to yours. Allah is greater. He just gives and gives without any limits.
The pairing of these two names also shows how nothing can come in the way of His giving. We live in a world where politics, leadership, and logistics all come in the way, preventing good people from helping one another. The wealthiest countries in the world still have some degree of the population suffering from poverty and hunger, and it's not because of a lack of resources. Even if they wanted to help, they could not. Allah's bounties have no limits, and no one can prevent Him from Giving to whom He wills.
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ does not need anything from His servants. We know His gifts are purely out of His generosity and kindness. They serve as a reminder of His love for all His creation. He even gives to those who might not be deserving; perhaps they would realize that their Lord is showering them with many blessings and that they return to Him. This would be a gift within a gift - He gives so you can get to know Him, leading us to seek His approval and mercy.
Prophetic supplication with this name:
If you wish to call upon this beautiful name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ we can learn the du'a Prophet Suleiman (as) recited asking for forgivness and wealth.
قَالَ
رَبِّ
ٱغۡفِرۡ
لِي
وَهَبۡ
لِي
مُلۡكٗا
لَّا
يَنۢبَغِي
لِأَحَدٖ
مِّنۢ
بَعۡدِيٓۖ
إِنَّكَ
أَنتَ
ٱلۡوَهَّابُ
Qaala Rabbigh fir lee wa hab lee mulkal laa yambaghee li ahadin min ba’dee innaka Antal Wahhaab
English Translation:
"He said, 'My Lord, forgive me and grant me a kingdom such as will not belong to anyone after me. Indeed, You are the Bestower.'"
— (
Qur'an 38:35
)
Reflection:
This name should also make us realize that our success is only through Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Whatever good you do, who inspired that impulse within you? Who records and rewards the good one does? It's all from Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. He is not obliged in any way, and He does whatever He wishes. But through learning about Allah's divine names, we learn about His justice, generosity, and abundance, as well as His care, love, and forgiveness. These are all gifts of Al-Wahhab.
Upon further reflection on this name, we may also realize that any inherent skills/qualities we have are also a gift from Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Don't let your
nafs
(i.e., ego) intrude and take control over your heart. We do that in part by remaining thankful to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ because we did nothing to be deserving of His gifts. He just gives, period. No questions asked, no "please sign here on the dotted line." He then leaves us with the choice to take it for granted or to be grateful. It's on us to see His kindness and His mercy.
Narrated Uqba: I offered the Asr prayer behind the Prophet (ﷺ) at Medina. When he had finished the prayer with Taslim, he got up hurriedly and went out by crossing the rows of the people to one of the dwellings of his wives. The people got scared at his speed. The Prophet (ﷺ) came back and found the people surprised at his haste and said to them, "I remembered a piece of gold Lying in my house and I did not like it to divert my attention from Allah's worship, so I have ordered it to be distributed (in charity).
[1]
The gift in you:
Let's say you gave a gift to a friend, and you see it wasn't appreciated, used, or had the opposite effect you intended - how would you feel? The truth is it hurts. Imagine a recent kidney donor seeing their friend revert back to being an alcoholic. It would be a big slap in the face. Similarly, Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has given certain people gifts that get abused. We have knowledgeable people, but they use their knowledge to manipulate and cheat others. In the act of omission, Allah's given us the faculty to achieve great things, but we don't live up to our potential. Instead, we get caught up and waste time playing meaningless games. We must try our best to use the gifts Allah's given us in a way that would not insult the giver. We should use our gifts to spread goodness to try and uplift and benefit others.
Just as Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ gives gifts out of love we should learn to do the same.
"Aishah narrated: 'The Prophet would accept gifts and he would give something in return.'"
[2]
Abu Huraira reported that the Prophet ﷺ said, "Give gifts and you will love one another."
[3]
And just as a reminder, no gift is too small.
Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, "O Muslim women! No one of you should consider insignificant (a gift) to give to her neighbour even if it is (a gift of) the trotters of a sheep".
[4]
References:
[1]
Sahih Bukhari 851
[2]
Sahih (Darussalam) Jami` at-Tirmidhi 1953
[3]
Hasan (Al-Albani) Al-Adab Al-Mufrad 594
[4]
Riyad as-Salihin 306
