=== 24. Al-Mu'izz | الْمُعِزُّ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-muizz/

AL-MUʿIZZ MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Muʿizz
(The Honourer-Bestower)
Al-Muʿizz Meaning:
The Giver of Honor, The Bestower of Might.
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Mu'izz, He gives esteem to whoever He willed; hence there will be no one to degrade them. He degrades whoever He willed; hence there is no one else to provide them with esteem. Al-Mu'izz is the one to give strength and honor to His obedient and loving servants. He gives material power to whoever He wills. He strengthens, glorifies, and makes it possible for someone or something to be respected.
Mentions of Al-Muʿizz:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root ayn-zay-zay (ع ز ز), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to be mighty, potent, strong, powerful, high, elevated, noble, exalted, honorable, to be noble, glorious, illustrious, indomitable, invincible, respected, cherished, dear to, scarce, rare, precious, and/or unattainable.
The following two names in the series (i.e., Al-Mu'izz and Al-Mudhill) are closely related to the previous names. The emphasis of these attributes is on giving dominion or sovereignty to the people and/or taking it away. Imam al-Ghazali writes on Al-Mu'izz, "true dominion consists in deliverance [meaning set free] from the shame of need, the dominance of passion, and the disgrace of ignorance."
Among the disputed names:
We've also covered how varying scholars have different criteria for what consitutes as a name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Al-Mu'izz is not fully recognized as an official name by certain scholars such as Ibn Uthaymeen, Ibn Hazm, and Ibn al-Wazir among others. As a rule of thumb, if the name contains prefix alif lam before the name then that's a clear indication of belonging as a name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ.
The name Al-Mu'izz does not appear in the Qur'an, but many verses allude to this attribute as the one who gives
izzah
meaning strength, power, or dignity. This has been mentioned in the name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ Al-Aziz which shares the same root.
قُلِ
ٱللَّهُمَّ
مَٰلِكَ
ٱلۡمُلۡكِ
تُؤۡتِي
ٱلۡمُلۡكَ
مَن
تَشَآءُ
وَتَنزِعُ
ٱلۡمُلۡكَ
مِمَّن
تَشَآءُ
وَتُعِزُّ
مَن
تَشَآءُ
وَتُذِلُّ
مَن
تَشَآءُۖ
بِيَدِكَ
ٱلۡخَيۡرُۖ
إِنَّكَ
عَلَىٰ
كُلِّ
شَيۡءٖ
قَدِيرٞ
Qulil laahumma Maalikal Mulki tu'til mulka man tashaaa’u wa tanzi’ul mulka mimman tashhaaa’u wa tu’izzu man tashaaa’u wa tuzillu man tashaaa’u biyadikal khairu innaka ‘alaa kulli shai’in Qadeer
English Translation:
"Say, “O Allah, Owner of Sovereignty, You give sovereignty to whom You will and You take sovereignty away from whom You will. You honor whom You will and You humble whom You will. In Your hand is [all] good. Indeed, You are over all things competent."
— (
Qur'an 3:26
)
فَبَدَأَ
بِأَوۡعِيَتِهِمۡ
قَبۡلَ
وِعَآءِ
أَخِيهِ
ثُمَّ
ٱسۡتَخۡرَجَهَا
مِن
وِعَآءِ
أَخِيهِۚ
كَذَٰلِكَ
كِدۡنَا
لِيُوسُفَۖ
مَا
كَانَ
لِيَأۡخُذَ
أَخَاهُ
فِي
دِينِ
ٱلۡمَلِكِ
إِلَّآ
أَن
يَشَآءَ
ٱللَّهُۚ
نَرۡفَعُ
دَرَجَٰتٖ
مَّن
نَّشَآءُۗ
وَفَوۡقَ
كُلِّ
ذِي
عِلۡمٍ
عَلِيمٞ
Fabada-a bi-aw'iyatihim qabla wi'aaa'i akheehi summas takhrajahaa minw wi aaa'i akheeh; kazaalika kidnaa li Yoosuf; maa kaana liyaakhuza akhaahu fee deenil maliki illaaa any yashaaa'al laah; narfa’u darajaatim man nashaaa'; wa fawqa kulli zee ilmin Aleem
English Translation:
"So he began [the search] with their bags before the bag of his brother; then he extracted it from the bag of his brother. Thus did We plan for Joseph. He could not have taken his brother within the religion of the king except that Allah willed. We raise in degrees whom We will, but over every possessor of knowledge is one [more] knowing."
— (
Qur'an 12:76
)
Reflection:
To be among the honored Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ tells in
Surah Hujurat verse 76,
"O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the most noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted."
This famous verse addresses racial discrimination and prejudice. We are all created from male and female (understood to mean our origin is the same as Adam and Eve). Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has created us to meet other tribes so that we may get to know one another. To gain knowledge and to further understand the human condition. Despite the visible differences, we bleed the same.
In the commentary of Tafhim ul-Quran, "O people, be aware: your God is One. No Arab has any superiority over a non-Arab, and no non-Arab any superiority over an Arab, and no white one has any superiority over a black one, and no black one any superiority over a white one, except on the basis of taqwa (piety)." With this in mind, one can characterize themselves by this name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ by using their strength and might to what has been commanded and to uphold/honor it. The opposite for Al-Mudhill is also true. To lower and debase that which Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has forbiden.
مَن
كَانَ
يُرِيدُ
ٱلۡعِزَّةَ
فَلِلَّهِ
ٱلۡعِزَّةُ
جَمِيعًاۚ
إِلَيۡهِ
يَصۡعَدُ
ٱلۡكَلِمُ
ٱلطَّيِّبُ
وَٱلۡعَمَلُ
ٱلصَّـٰلِحُ
يَرۡفَعُهُۥۚ
وَٱلَّذِينَ
يَمۡكُرُونَ
ٱلسَّيِّـَٔاتِ
لَهُمۡ
عَذَابٞ
شَدِيدٞۖ
وَمَكۡرُ
أُوْلَـٰٓئِكَ
هُوَ
يَبُورُ
Man kaana yureedul izzata falillaahil izzatu jamee'aa; ilaihi yas'adul kalimut taiyibu wal'amalus saalihu yarfa'uh; wallazeena yamkuroonas sayyiaati lahum 'azaabun shadeed; wa makru ulaaa'ika huwa yaboor
English Translation:
"Whoever desires honor [through power] – then to Allah belongs all honor. To Him ascends good speech, and righteous work raises it. But they who plot evil deeds will have a severe punishment, and the plotting of those – it will perish."
— (
Qur'an 35:10
)
وَٱبۡتَغِ
فِيمَآ
ءَاتَىٰكَ
ٱللَّهُ
ٱلدَّارَ
ٱلۡأٓخِرَةَۖ
وَلَا
تَنسَ
نَصِيبَكَ
مِنَ
ٱلدُّنۡيَاۖ
وَأَحۡسِن
كَمَآ
أَحۡسَنَ
ٱللَّهُ
إِلَيۡكَۖ
وَلَا
تَبۡغِ
ٱلۡفَسَادَ
فِي
ٱلۡأَرۡضِۖ
إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
لَا
يُحِبُّ
ٱلۡمُفۡسِدِينَ
Wabtaghi feemaaa aataakal laahud Daaral Aakhirata wa laa tansa naseebaka minad dunyaa wa ahsin kamaaa ahsanal laahu ilaika wa laa tabghil fasaada fil ardi innal laaha laa yuhibbul mufsideen
English Translation:
"But seek, through that which Allah has given you, the home of the Hereafter; and [yet], do not forget your share of the world. And do good as Allah has done good to you. And desire not corruption in the land. Indeed, Allah does not like corrupters."
— (
Quran 28:77
)
