=== 27. Al-Baseer | الْبَصِيرُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-baseer/

AL-BASEER MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Basir
(The All-Seeing)
Al-Basir Meaning:
The All-Noticing. The one who sees all things by His Eternal Seeing without a pupil or any other instrument.
Allah is Al-Baseer (in Arabic: ٱلْبَصِيرُ), He sees everything, even if it's insignificant, like a black ant on a black stone when it's pitch black at night. There is nothing hidden from His sight. He has knowledge of all things, both in Heaven and on Earth. He does not miss any detail. His sight encompasses all, not just the superficial. He sees what's truly within.
Mentions of Al-Basir:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root ba-sad-ra (ب ص ر), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to see, behold, to notice, to understand, to know, to perceive, to have insight, to be acutely aware.
Al-Basir is the complementary name to
As-Sami
, which means "The All Hearing." These names are often used in tandem to emphasize how Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has complete awareness and is knowledgeable of everything. The idea that nothing escapes Him. This name makes an appearance a total of 42 times throughout the Qur'an.
From the story of Prophet Musa (as):
قَالَ
لَا
تَخَافَآ ۖ
إِنَّنِى
مَعَكُمَآ
أَسْمَعُ
وَأَرَىٰ
Qaala laa takhaafaaa innanee ma’akumaa asma’u wa araa
English Translation:
"[Allah] said, “Fear not. Indeed, I am with you both; I hear and I see."
— (
Qur'an 20:46
)
This verse was said to Prophet Musa (as) when he was commanded to confront the tyrannical Firaun. Imagine being in Prophet Musa (as) shoes. You know Firaun's violent history of torturing and enslaving anyone who defied him. Now, imagine Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ telling you He is by your side. That He is hearing and seeing does not ease Musa (as) task at hand, but it does highlight another meaning to the name Al-Basir, which often gets overlooked. It's a reminder that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is not just watching you, but He is watching over you. It's a name that, once understood, should instill peace, comfort, and protection.
وَتَوَكَّلْ
عَلَى
ٱلْعَزِيزِ
ٱلرَّحِيمِ
ٱلَّذِى
يَرَىٰكَ
حِينَ
تَقُومُ
وَتَقَلُّبَكَ
فِى
ٱلسَّـٰجِدِينَ
إِنَّهُۥ
هُوَ
ٱلسَّمِيعُ
ٱلْعَلِيمُ
Wa tawakkal alal ‘Azeezir Raheem Allazee yaraaka heena taqoom Wa taqallubaka fis saajideen Innahoo Huwas Samee’ul ‘Aleem
English Translation:
"And rely upon the Exalted in Might, the Merciful, Who sees you when you arise And your movement among those who prostrate. Indeed, He is the Hearing, the Knowing."
— (
Qur'an 26:217-220
)
۞إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
يَأۡمُرُكُمۡ
أَن
تُؤَدُّواْ
ٱلۡأَمَٰنَٰتِ
إِلَىٰٓ
أَهۡلِهَا
وَإِذَا
حَكَمۡتُم
بَيۡنَ
ٱلنَّاسِ
أَن
تَحۡكُمُواْ
بِٱلۡعَدۡلِۚ
إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
نِعِمَّا
يَعِظُكُم
بِهِۦٓۗ
إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
كَانَ
سَمِيعَۢا
بَصِيرٗا
Innal laaha ya’murukum an tu’addul amaanaati ilaaa ahlihaa wa izaa hakamtum bainan naasi an tahkumoo bil’adl; innal laaha ni’immaa ya’izukum bih; innal laaha kaana Samee’am Baseeraa
English Translation:
"Indeed, Allah commands you to render trusts to whom they are due and when you judge between people to judge with justice. Excellent is that which Allah instructs you. Indeed, Allah is ever Hearing and Seeing."
— (
Qur'an 4:58
)
From the famous hadith of Jibreel,
"Tell me about excellence. The Prophet said, “Excellence is to worship Allah as if you see Him, for if you do not see Him, He surely sees you."
[1]
۞قُلۡ
أَؤُنَبِّئُكُم
بِخَيۡرٖ
مِّن
ذَٰلِكُمۡۖ
لِلَّذِينَ
ٱتَّقَوۡاْ
عِندَ
رَبِّهِمۡ
جَنَّـٰتٞ
تَجۡرِي
مِن
تَحۡتِهَا
ٱلۡأَنۡهَٰرُ
خَٰلِدِينَ
فِيهَا
وَأَزۡوَٰجٞ
مُّطَهَّرَةٞ
وَرِضۡوَٰنٞ
مِّنَ
ٱللَّهِۗ
وَٱللَّهُ
بَصِيرُۢ
بِٱلۡعِبَادِ
Qul a’unabbi ‘ukum bikhairim min zaalikum; lillazeenat taqaw ‘inda Rabbihim jannaatun tajree min tahtihal anhaaru khaalideena feehaa wa azwaajum mutahharatunw wa ridwaanum minal laah; wallaahu baseerum bil’ibaad
English Translation:
"Say, 'Shall I inform you of [something] better than that? For those who fear Allah will be gardens in the presence of their Lord beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally, and purified spouses and approval from Allah. And Allah is Seeing of [His] servants –"
— (
Qur'an 3:15
)
Reflection:
We must remember that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is The All-Hearer and The All-Seer. If we kept this at the forefront of our minds, it would save us from a lot of trouble. Knowing Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is watching, we would avoid doing or saying something we would later regret. It serves as a preventive mechanism through which we can filter our choices, raising awareness of our speech and actions.
Furthermore, the believer who knows Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Basir finds comfort. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ notices every detail, public or in private. Sometimes we may not get credited for our work, or our kindness and generosity may get taken advantage of or go unappreciated. But the believer can find solace in understanding that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ sees and knows all. Nothing goes without His noticing, and on the day of judgment, all accounts will be measured accurately. If instead of seeking validation through others, we realized that any good would be rewarded in a multiple by Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ and His approval is all that matters, we should be overjoyed. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ says in the Qur'an, "And what is the reward of goodness, but goodness." (
Quran 55:60
) Continue to do good because it will come back around. Do things for Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ sake and you will never be disappointed.
وَقُلِ
ٱعۡمَلُواْ
فَسَيَرَى
ٱللَّهُ
عَمَلَكُمۡ
وَرَسُولُهُۥ
وَٱلۡمُؤۡمِنُونَۖ
وَسَتُرَدُّونَ
إِلَىٰ
عَٰلِمِ
ٱلۡغَيۡبِ
وَٱلشَّهَٰدَةِ
فَيُنَبِّئُكُم
بِمَا
كُنتُمۡ
تَعۡمَلُونَ
,
Wa qul i’maloo fasayaral laahu ‘amalakum wa Rasooluhoo wal mu’minoon; wa saturaddoona ilaa ‘Aalimil Ghaibi washshahaadati fa yunabbi’ukum bimaa kuntum ta’maloon
English Translation:
"And say, 'Do [as you will], for Allah will see your deeds, and [so, will] His Messenger and the believers. And you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, and He will inform you of what you used to do.'"
— (
Qur'an 9:105
)
References:
[1]
Sahih Muslim 9
