=== 39. Al-Muqeet | المُقيِت ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-muqeet/

AL-MUQIT MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Muqit / Al-Muqeet
(The Nourisher)
Al-Muqit Meaning:
The Nourisher, The Sustainer
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Muqeet (in Arabic: ٱلْمُقِيتُ) meaning the ultimate sustainer. He gives strength and nourishment to His creations and maintains all that exists. He oversees, guards, and preserves all. To Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ we owe the satisfaction of all needs, but He is alone and independent of needs.
Mentions of Al-Muqit:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root qaf-waw-ta (ق و ت), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to feed, nourish, to supply, sustain, to keep, preserve, guard, to witness, observe, watch over.
Physical v. Spiritual Needs:
The name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ, Al-Muqeet - The Nourisher. We all require sustenance and nourishment. At first, we require physical nourishment, food, and drink being the strongest of needs. Once that need is satiated, we often experience an inner void, and some mistakenly believe it can only be filled with material things. After all the hoarding and consuming, they will find this hole is a bottomless pit that can never be filled. The nourishment they need can only be found in the light of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Through devotion to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ and increasing their spiritual aspirations, they fill the missing piece. In this way, Al-Muqit is the spiritual nourisher.
But Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ also has prescribed physical nourishment. Every person has it written for him/her what nourishment is available, and no one can come in the way of limiting what's been ordained.
It was narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah that the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said: "O people, fear Allah and be moderate in seeking a living, for no soul will die until it has received all its provision, even if it is slow in coming. So fear Allah and be moderate in seeking provision; take that which is permissible and leave that which is forbidden."
[1]
So in this sense, it's similar to the meaning of the name Ar-Razzaq (The Provider) but more emphasis on the spiritual aspect. Imam al-Ghazali writes, "this name is more specific, since provision includes what is other than food as well as food." As the name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ it is only mentioned once in the Qur'an.
مَّن
يَشۡفَعۡ
شَفَٰعَةً
حَسَنَةٗ
يَكُن
لَّهُۥ
نَصِيبٞ
مِّنۡهَاۖ
وَمَن
يَشۡفَعۡ
شَفَٰعَةٗ
سَيِّئَةٗ
يَكُن
لَّهُۥ
كِفۡلٞ
مِّنۡهَاۗ
وَكَانَ
ٱللَّهُ
عَلَىٰ
كُلِّ
شَيۡءٖ
مُّقِيتٗا
Mai yashfa shafaa’atan hasanatay yakul lahoo naseebum minhaa wa mai yashfa shafaa’atan saiyi'atany-yakul lahoo kiflum minhaa; wa kaanal laahu 'alaa kulli shai'im
Muqeetaa
English Translation:
"Whoever intercedes for a good cause will have a reward therefrom; and whoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a burden therefrom. And ever is Allah, over all things, a Keeper."
— (
Qur'an 4:85
)
Because of this attribute of being the one who sustains all and provides for all, some will write Al-Muqit as being "The Powerful." But being the nourisher is a more accurate description. Below we include more Quranic verses that demonstrate the quality of this name rather than verses that reference this name.
۞وَمَا
مِن
دَآبَّةٖ
فِي
ٱلۡأَرۡضِ
إِلَّا
عَلَى
ٱللَّهِ
رِزۡقُهَا
وَيَعۡلَمُ
مُسۡتَقَرَّهَا
وَمُسۡتَوۡدَعَهَاۚ
كُلّٞ
فِي
كِتَٰبٖ
مُّبِينٖ
Wa maa min daaabbatin fil ardi illaa ‘alal laahi rizquhaa wa ya’lamu mustaqarrahaa wa mustawda’ahaa; kullun fee Kitaabim Mubeen
English Translation:
"And there is no creature on earth but that upon Allah is its provision, and He knows its place of dwelling and place of storage. All is in a clear register."
— (
Qur'an 11:6
)
ٱللَّهُ
ٱلَّذِي
خَلَقَ
ٱلسَّمَٰوَٰتِ
وَٱلۡأَرۡضَ
وَأَنزَلَ
مِنَ
ٱلسَّمَآءِ
مَآءٗ
فَأَخۡرَجَ
بِهِۦ
مِنَ
ٱلثَّمَرَٰتِ
رِزۡقٗا
لَّكُمۡۖ
وَسَخَّرَ
لَكُمُ
ٱلۡفُلۡكَ
لِتَجۡرِيَ
فِي
ٱلۡبَحۡرِ
بِأَمۡرِهِۦۖ
وَسَخَّرَ
لَكُمُ
ٱلۡأَنۡهَٰرَ
Allaahul lazee khalaqas samaawaati wal arda wa anzala minas samaaa’i maaa’an faakhraja bihee minas samaraati rizqal lakum wa sakhkhara lakumul fulka litajriya fil bahri bi amrihee wa sakhkhara lakumul anhaar
English Translation:
"It is Allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as provision for you and subjected for you the ships to sail through the sea by His command and subjected for you the rivers."
— (
Qur'an 14:32
)
قُلْ
أَغَيْرَ
ٱللَّهِ
أَتَّخِذُ
وَلِيًّۭا
فَاطِرِ
ٱلسَّمَـٰوَٰتِ
وَٱلْأَرْضِ
وَهُوَ
يُطْعِمُ
وَلَا
يُطْعَمُ ۗ
قُلْ
إِنِّىٓ
أُمِرْتُ
أَنْ
أَكُونَ
أَوَّلَ
مَنْ
أَسْلَمَ ۖ
وَلَا
تَكُونَنَّ
مِنَ
ٱلْمُشْرِكِينَ
Qul aghairal laahi attakhizu waliyyan faatiris samaawaati wal ardi wa Huwa yut’imu wa laa yut’am; qul inneee umirtu an akoona awwala man aslama wa laa takoonanna minal mushrikeen
English Translation:
"Say, “Is it other than Allah I should take as a protector, Creator of the heavens and the earth, while it is He who feeds and is not fed?” Say, [O Muhammad], “Indeed, I have been commanded to be the first [among you] who submit [to Allah] and [was commanded], ‘Do not ever be of the polytheists.’"
— (
Qur'an 6:14
)
Reflection:
We've explored in more detail how a believer benefits in understanding how Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is the giver of sustenance (see the name
Ar-Razzaq
). But a point worth reiterating is if you see that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Muqit, then you realize the importance of sabr (patience). “And We will surely test you with something of fear and hunger and a loss of wealth and lives and fruits, but give good tidings to the patient…” (
Qur'an 2:155
)
Go out in the world, be as deliberate as you can be, do your work, do what's required of you but leave the rest to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Nothing can happen without His will, and if you trust He is the nourisher, the provider, the all-wise, then you must not be hard on yourself. What has been written for you, you will receive. Resorting to unlawful measures will not increase your sustenance. The number is the number. How you will receive it is up to you. It may come at once in a large sum. For others, it may be a slow and steady race.
Abu Huraira reported Allah's Messenger ﷺ as saying: O Allah, make the provision of Muhammad's family sufficient just to sustain life.
[2]
References:
[1]
Sahih (Darussalam) Sunan Ibn Majah 2144
[2]
Sahih Muslim 1055
