=== 49. Al-Ba'ith | الْبَاعِثُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-baith/

AL-BA'ITH MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Ba'ith
(The Infuser of New Life)
Al-Ba'ith Meaning:
The Awakener, The Resurrector, The Arouser
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Ba'ith (in Arabic: ٱلْبَاعِثُ), meaning the One who chooses who will be awakened and be sent forth. He is the giver of life and who sends light into the world. The One who resurrects His servants after death for reward and/or punishment.
Mentions of Al-Ba'ith:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root ba-ayn-tha (ب ع ث), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to call forth, awaken, to raise up from sleep or death, to resurrect, to delegate, consign, to send, send out, make manifest.
Among the Disputed Names:
Al-Ba'ith is one of the names of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ where there isn't a consensus. The more common opinion is that Al-Ba'ith is the name of Allah Azzawajal. As we mentioned previously, of the 99 names of Allah, 81 are explicitly mentioned in the Qur'an. The other attributes are derived elsewhere. The scholars' Ibn al-Arabi, Ibn Hazm, and al-Radwani have excluded this name, whereas al-Ghazali, al-Walid, and Ibn Mandah have recognized it.
Al-Ba'ith - The Resurrector:
This quality/attribute of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ describes how He will resurrect us from the dead. A final rebirth. He will awaken the dead and infuse them with a new life. It is written by Sheikh Tosun in his book, "He will raise people from their graves and bring out all the actions, thoughts, and feelings that occurred during their liftetime on this earth."
أَوَلَمۡ
يَرَوۡاْ
أَنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
ٱلَّذِي
خَلَقَ
ٱلسَّمَٰوَٰتِ
وَٱلۡأَرۡضَ
وَلَمۡ
يَعۡيَ
بِخَلۡقِهِنَّ
بِقَٰدِرٍ
عَلَىٰٓ
أَن
يُحۡـِۧيَ
ٱلۡمَوۡتَىٰۚ
بَلَىٰٓۚ
إِنَّهُۥ
عَلَىٰ
كُلِّ
شَيۡءٖ
قَدِيرٞ
Awalam yaraw annal laahal lazee khalaqas samaawaati wal arda wa lam ya'ya bikhal qihinna biqaadirin ‘alaaa aiyuhyiyal mawtaa; balaaa innahoo ‘alaa kulli shai'in Qadeer
English Translation:
"Do they not see that Allah, who created the heavens and earth and did not fail in their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes. Indeed, He is over all things competent."
— (
Qur'an 46:33
)
وَأَنَّ
ٱلسَّاعَةَ
ءَاتِيَةٞ
لَّا
رَيۡبَ
فِيهَا
وَأَنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
يَبۡعَثُ
مَن
فِي
ٱلۡقُبُورِ
Wa annas Saa'ata aatiya tul laa raiba feeha wa annal laaha yab'asuman fil quboor
English Translation:
" And [that they may know] that the Hour is coming – no doubt about it – and that Allah will resurrect those in the graves."
— (
Qur'an 22:7
)
Al-Ba'ith - The Sender:
As mentioned in the Qur'an, the name Al-Ba'ith is not mentioned in the noun form, but many verses contain the verb form. For example, "Bā'atha" (He sent, 62:2), following this line, some commentators have mentioned an aspect of this name of sending forth something (for example, His Prophets and His Guidance). The other meaning is being the resurrector, "Yabā'athu" (will they be raised, 64:7). He has absolute power to change the state of a person from sleep to wakefulness.
هُوَ
ٱلَّذِي
بَعَثَ
فِي
ٱلۡأُمِّيِّـۧنَ
رَسُولٗا
مِّنۡهُمۡ
يَتۡلُواْ
عَلَيۡهِمۡ
ءَايَٰتِهِۦ
وَيُزَكِّيهِمۡ
وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ
ٱلۡكِتَٰبَ
وَٱلۡحِكۡمَةَ
وَإِن
كَانُواْ
مِن
قَبۡلُ
لَفِي
ضَلَٰلٖ
مُّبِينٖ
Huwal lazee
ba'atha
fil ummiyyeena Rasoolam min hum yatloo ‘alaihim aayaatihee wa yuzakkeehim wa yu'allimuhumul Kitaaba wal Hikmata wa in kaanoo min qablu lafee dalaalim mubeen
English Translation:
"It is He who has sent among the unlettered a Messenger from themselves reciting to them His verses and purifying them and teaching them the Book and wisdom – although they were before in clear error –"
— (
Qur'an 62:2
)
In this verse and many others which use the verb form, it is used to reference the Prophets (may peace be upon them) and how they were "raised," "risen," or "sent" to be a chosen messenger of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ and to warn of the inevitable resurrection.
وَهُوَ
ٱلَّذِي
يَتَوَفَّىٰكُم
بِٱلَّيۡلِ
وَيَعۡلَمُ
مَا
جَرَحۡتُم
بِٱلنَّهَارِ
ثُمَّ
يَبۡعَثُكُمۡ
فِيهِ
لِيُقۡضَىٰٓ
أَجَلٞ
مُّسَمّٗىۖ
ثُمَّ
إِلَيۡهِ
مَرۡجِعُكُمۡ
ثُمَّ
يُنَبِّئُكُم
بِمَا
كُنتُمۡ
تَعۡمَلُونَ
Wa Huwal lazee yatawaf faakum billaili wa ya'lamu maa jarahtum binnahaari summa
yab'asukum
feehee liyuqdaaa ajalum musamman summa ilaihi marji'ukum summa yunabbi ‘ukum bimaa kuntum ta'maloon (section 7)
English Translation:
"And it is He who takes your souls by night and knows what you have committed by day. Then He revives you therein that a specified term may be fulfilled. Then to Him will be your return; then He will inform you about what you used to do."
— (
Qur'an 6:60
)
Battle of Uhud:
In the Qur'an, it was revealed to Prophet Muhammad ﷺ who said the following regarding the martyrs of the battle of Uhud.
وَلَا
تَحۡسَبَنَّ
ٱلَّذِينَ
قُتِلُواْ
فِي
سَبِيلِ
ٱللَّهِ
أَمۡوَٰتَۢاۚ
بَلۡ
أَحۡيَآءٌ
عِندَ
رَبِّهِمۡ
يُرۡزَقُونَ
Wa laa tahsabannal lazeena qutiloo fee sabeelillaahi amwaata; bal ahyaaa'un 'inda Rabbihim yurzaqoon
English Translation:
"And never think of those who have been killed in the cause of Allah as dead. Rather, they are alive with their Lord, receiving provision,"
— (
Qur'an 3:169
)
Reflection:
Most of humanity understands that death is an inevitability. They know of it, but they do not really understand it. They treat death as non-existence, the end of the road, or finality. But the believer understands that death is just act one scene one of this play. In the next scene, we will be brought back and held accountable for all that transpired. We will be held responsible for our actions. This should not be a scary proposition. Rather we should be joyful about this revelation. It brings purpose and meaning to our existence, "Then did you think that We created you uselessly and that to Us you would not be returned?" (
Qur'an 23:115
) So the one who understands the name Al-Ba'ith develops greater certainity in the day of resurrection and greater conviction in Allah's سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ promise.
The name also creates a sense of responsibility within, a duty to ourselves to become better and avoid being a degenerate (i.e., a person with loose morals, corrupt, or showing signs of decline).
It was narrated that Aishah said: "The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to me: 'O 'Aishah, beware of (evil) deeds that are regarded as insignificant, for they have a pursuer from Allah. (i.e. accountability)."
[1]
The realization of death also brings about a sense of urgency. We have, but a limited time on earth, so we should not squander it. It should inspire us to do good and rush to acts loved by Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. However you die here is how you will be brought back to life there, so seek good, and you will receive good.
Death also brings to the surface the importance of moment-to-moment awareness, like a soldier about to be deployed overseas. They don't have any time to waste on trivial matters or petty arguments. They let all these things go, which tells you something about their importance. You can even imagine the week leading up to his deployment; he will handle all his affairs and be extremely loving and present. Why wait until the last second on our deathbeds to feel this way? Why wait before we're deployed and uncertain of the future? Is it because maybe we're taking tomorrow for granted? At any moment, we have the power to reflect on the name Al-Ba'ith and tap into the truth Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has created this universe as a temporary place. Death is the inescapable reality we will all face. As mentioned in Surah Baqarah, "Indeed we belong to Allah, and indeed to Him we will return." (
Qur'an 2:156
)
In many places of the Qur'an, Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ has referred to as knowledge (
ilm
) as
hayat
life. The heart without knowledge (i.e.,
jahl
or Ignorance) is death. So, you can revive yourself by pursuing knowledge and resurrect others by being generous with that information. Imam Ghazali mentions, "Ignorance is the greatest death and knowledge the noblest life. [...] Whoever lifts another out of Ignorance to knowledge has already created him anew and revivified him to a blessed life."
References:
[1]
Sahih (Darussalam) Sunan Ibn Majah 4243
