=== 6. Al-Mumin | الْمُؤْمِنُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-mumin/

AL-MUMIN MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Mu'min
(The Infuser of Faith)
al-Mu'min Meaning:
The Affirmer of Truth, The Guarantor, The Giver of Faith.
The name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ as Al-Mu'min (in Arabic: ٱلْمُؤْمِنُ) means the one who witnessed for Himself that no one is God but Him. And He is the one who sent down Messengers and revealed His books as clear proofs.
Mentions of Al-Mu'min:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Roots:
From the root hamza-mim-nun (أ م ن), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to be secure, safe, free from fear to be quiet, tranquil to grant protection, safeguard to be trusted, trustworthy to believe in.
Meanings of Al-Mu'min:
Each name we explore and study unlocks a door to further our relationship with Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. As we grow more acquainted with His essence, we can feel our relationship with Him transform and become more secure. The sixth name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Mu'min which is the quality that has enabled the hearts to experience this feeling and brought us together. Al-Mu'min is the inspirer of faith and the giver of security. He's the one who's sent down His book and Messengers with signs of clear proof for all who'd listen. Some of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ names can have many meanings or interpretations. Al-Mu'min is one of those names.
He is the one who provides justice and security to His creations. He fulfills all His promises and will never punish any creature unfairly. He is as His servant expects Him to be, "Indeed, Allah does not do injustice, [even] as much as an atom’s weight; while if there is a good deed, He multiplies it and gives from Himself a great reward." (
Qur'an 4:40
) This sentiment is repeated in
Surah Ghafir verse 17,
"This Day every soul will be recompensed for what it earned. No injustice today! Indeed, Allah is swift in account."
The Qur'an repeatedly mentions the believer as mu'min, so how do we then ascribe this name as an attribute of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ? First, the context is completely different; what's true for one does not mean it's true for the other. In reality, there is no comparison with Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ with anything. Mumin is derived from
amana
or
imaan
, meaning security, surety, and/or peace. When it refers to the believer, it means the one who attests to what is true (i.e., the six articles of faith - (1) Belief in God, (2) Angels, (3) Books, (4) Messengers, (5) Day of Judgment, and (6) His Divine Decree). When it applies to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ, it is the one who confirms Himself as being true. So the one who believes is said to have security, safety, and protection from potential danger.
هُوَ
ٱللَّهُ
ٱلَّذِي
لَآ
إِلَٰهَ
إِلَّا
هُوَ
ٱلۡمَلِكُ
ٱلۡقُدُّوسُ
ٱلسَّلَٰمُ
ٱلۡمُؤۡمِنُ
ٱلۡمُهَيۡمِنُ
ٱلۡعَزِيزُ
ٱلۡجَبَّارُ
ٱلۡمُتَكَبِّرُۚ
سُبۡحَٰنَ
ٱللَّهِ
عَمَّا
يُشۡرِكُونَ
Huwal-laahul-lazee laaa Ilaaha illaa Huwal-Malikul Quddoosus-Salaamul
Muminul
Muhaiminul-aAzeezul Jabbaarul-Mutakabbir; Subhaanal laahi Ammaa yushrikoon
English Translation:
"He is Allah, other than whom there is no deity, the Sovereign, the Pure, the Perfection, the Bestower of Faith, the Overseer, the Exalted in Might, the Compeller, the Superior. Exalted is Allah above whatever they associate with Him."
— (
Qur'an 59:23
)
We are weak without Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ:
Imam al-Ghazali writes an analogy of a man left alone in a state of ruin where he could not move his limbs and was pursued by enemies. Even if he could move, he still had no weapons or soldiers to fight with. Even if he had weapons or an able army he could not guarantee victory. Then someone comes to his rescue, attends to him in his weakness, provides him a big sturdy fortress, soldiers, and weapons, and grants him complete security and safety. The only befitting name for such a person would be "the faithful".
Imam Ghazali continues, "Man is basically weak by nature." Our being compared to other creations seems like we are strong in the hierarchy of the animal kingdom, but in many ways, we are also fragile. The Qur'an even mentions this fact:
يُرِيدُ
ٱللَّهُ
أَن
يُخَفِّفَ
عَنكُمۡۚ
وَخُلِقَ
ٱلۡإِنسَٰنُ
ضَعِيفٗا
Yureedul laahu ai yukhaffifa ‘ankum; wa khuliqal insaanu da’eefaa
English Translation:
"And Allah wants to lighten for you [your difficulties]; and mankind was created weak."
— (
Qur'an 4:28
)
There exists many threats to our well-being. We have deadly diseases and infections, suffering from thirst and hunger, fear of fatal accidents, wars, and riots. It's a never-ending anxiety-inducing list. This is just phsyical realm of weakness. Then there's a spiritual aspect of being weak in regards to controlling one's desires, impulses, emotions, etc. Shaykh Tosun Bayrak said regarding this, "the worst of these enemies are our own egos and the accursed Devil. The tyrants, the maligners, the envious, come after them."
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is the only one who can protect us from all forms of harm and adversity. The Qur'an mentions how the people of Quraysh had their fears removed and prospered after the du'a Prophet Ibrahim (as) made. He asked for their safety, security, and prosperity, and to this day, the request of his du'a is fulfilled. From this, we understand that true security is only found with Allah Azzawajal.
ٱلَّذِيٓ
أَطۡعَمَهُم
مِّن
جُوعٖ
وَءَامَنَهُم
مِّنۡ
خَوۡفِۭ
Allazeee at’amahum min joo’inw-wa-aamanahum min khawf
English Translation:
"Who has fed them, [saving them] from hunger and made them safe, [saving them] from fear."
— (
Qur'an 106:4
)
Reflection:
We can benefit from knowing Al-Mu'min by having faith and trusting in Allah. Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ tells us in the Qur'an His rewards and promises for those who believe. We should feel special, immense gratitude, and honor that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ put belief in our hearts.
Just as Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is the source for safety and security, we should live this attribute by being a beacon for safety and security for others.
"It is narrated on the authority of Abu Huraira that the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) observed: He will not enter Paradise whose neighbor is not secure from his wrongful conduct."
[1]
The people should feel a blanket of comfort, warmth, and love that radiates from you.
Al-Mumin also protects us from injustice and oppression, so we must also stand up for what is right. If we see injustice, we should not remain silent. In whatever capacity we can help and try to make a difference, we should. This name, Al-Mu'min, can be invoked in any prayer. Still, it should be kept in mind by anyone experiencing fear or insecurity as a reminder to call upon Allah for protection, "Oh Allah! You are Al-Mu'min, protect us from this evil / enemy / oppressor. Give us the strength to be strong in our faith and let it not waver."
References:
[1]
Sahih Muslim 46
