=== 64. Al-Wajid | الْوَاجِدُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-wajid/

AL-WAJID MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Wajid
(The Perceiver)
Al-Wajid Meaning:
The Resourceful; The Unfailing, The Finder.
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Waajid (in Arabic: ٱلْوَاجِدُ), the one who does not need or lacks anything. He is the most resourceful and finds whatever He wills.
Mentions of Al-Wajid:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root waw-jim-dal (و ج د), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to find, discover, attain what was sought, to become aware of something, to perceive, to experience, to gain or possess wealth, property, resources, to be rich, to have abundance, to be without wants.
Among the disputed names:
For your notes, this is among the disputed names of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. There is no ayah in the Qur'an where this name is mentioned. However, as an attribute of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ it is accepted and valid.
Two meanings of Al-Wajid:
This name has two associated meanings, but they are connected. First, wajid (واجد) is an Arabic word meaning "to find." So naturally, the emphatic version of Al-Wajid as an attribute of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ means "The Finder." This speaks to the idea of Allah's resourcefulness in which there is no deficiency. He is not incapacitated in any way from what He directs His attention to. The idea is that whatever He seeks, He will find. Similar to
kun fa-yakunu
, "Be, and it is." (
36:82
). He does not lack anything and is absolutely resourceful. This leads to the second meaning of the name, which is the realizer. The one who realizes (i.e., in the sense of gaining something), but also the one who knows the truth in all things.
The name Al-Wajid does not appear explicitly in the Qur'an, but many verses describe this quality or attribute of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ.
وَوَجَدَكَ
ضَآلّٗا
فَهَدَىٰ
وَوَجَدَكَ
عَآئِلٗا
فَأَغۡنَىٰ
97. Wa wa jadaka daal lan fahada
98. Wa wa jadaka 'aa-ilan fa aghnaa
English Translation:
"And He found you lost and guided [you], And He found you poor and made [you] self-sufficient."
— (
Qur'an 93:7-8
)
أَيۡنَمَا
تَكُونُواْ
يُدۡرِككُّمُ
ٱلۡمَوۡتُ
وَلَوۡ
كُنتُمۡ
فِي
بُرُوجٖ
مُّشَيَّدَةٖۗ
وَإِن
تُصِبۡهُمۡ
حَسَنَةٞ
يَقُولُواْ
هَٰذِهِۦ
مِنۡ
عِندِ
ٱللَّهِۖ
وَإِن
تُصِبۡهُمۡ
سَيِّئَةٞ
يَقُولُواْ
هَٰذِهِۦ
مِنۡ
عِندِكَۚ
قُلۡ
كُلّٞ
مِّنۡ
عِندِ
ٱللَّهِۖ
فَمَالِ
هَـٰٓؤُلَآءِ
ٱلۡقَوۡمِ
لَا
يَكَادُونَ
يَفۡقَهُونَ
حَدِيثٗا
Ayna maa takoonoo yudrikkumul mawtu wa law kuntum fee buroojim mushai yadah; wa in tusibhum hasanatuny yaqooloo haazihee min indil laahi wa in tusibhum saiyi'atuny yaqooloo haazihee min 'indik; qul kullum min 'indillaahi famaa lihaaa 'ulaaa'il qawmi laa yakaadoona yafqahoona hadeesaa
English Translation:
"Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even if you should be within towers of lofty construction. But if good comes to them, they say, “This is from Allah “; and if evil befalls them, they say, “This is from you.” Say, “All [things] are from Allah.” So what is [the matter] with those people that they can hardly understand any statement?"
— (
Qur'an 4:78
)
وَٱلَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوٓاْ
أَعۡمَٰلُهُمۡ
كَسَرَابِۭ
بِقِيعَةٖ
يَحۡسَبُهُ
ٱلظَّمۡـَٔانُ
مَآءً
حَتَّىٰٓ
إِذَا
جَآءَهُۥ
لَمۡ
يَجِدۡهُ
شَيۡـٔٗا
وَوَجَدَ
ٱللَّهَ
عِندَهُۥ
فَوَفَّىٰهُ
حِسَابَهُۥۗ
وَٱللَّهُ
سَرِيعُ
ٱلۡحِسَابِ
Wallazeena kafarooo a'maaluhum kasaraabim biqee'atiny yahsabuhuz zamaanu maaa'an hattaaa izaa jaaa'ahoo lam yajid hu shai'anw wa wajadal laaha 'indahoo fa waffaahu hisaabah; wallaahu saree'ul hisaab
English Translation:
"But those who disbelieved – their deeds are like a mirage in a lowland which a thirsty one thinks is water until, when he comes to it, he finds it is nothing but finds Allah before Him, and He will pay him in full his due; and Allah is swift in account."
—(
Qur'an 24:39
)
Reflection:
The believer benefits from understanding that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Wajid. We further realize that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is free from all wants and all needs. Not in a reclusive way, but completely selfless with an open hand to those who seek Him and ask for His help. He is full in every sense of that word; we should not fear turning to Him and asking for all that is good for us. Find sufficiency in Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ for what we seek in all matters is Him. This is unlike the condition that develops from dealing with people who require reciprocity (i.e., favors in return). We're incapable of giving as freely as Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ gives because we're limited, we have finite resources (both in time and money), and in giving we deplete one of these reserves. We can try to make ourselves more resourceful, but it will always be relative. We can never be the absolutely resourceful one.
How can we make ourselves more resourceful? It is not always about having more to give more - although that is one aspect of what it means to be resourceful. Resourcefulness can mean trying to accomplish more in less time, being innovative, or finding creative yet simple solutions to overlooked problems.
It can also mean spending intelligently from our reserves so as to not be wasteful. If you found a way to buy a TV that was $1000 for $100, you might be very happy for being so resourceful. But the price is only one aspect of the purchase; the TV can cost you a lot in other ways, such as wasted time. This is often a very expensive part of the equation that's missing. If you spend 10 hours a week, that's 40 hours a month or a combined total of 480 hours a year! Imagine if you cut that viewing time in half or a third. You can measure to see if the quality of your life, mood, and happiness increases or decreases.
Ask yourself open-ended questions and be curious, "how could that time be better spent and what impact would that have in my life and for those around me?" It's a question worth exploring, and each person's answer will be different.
Sometimes, being resourceful can simply mean eliminating excess and needing less. Imam Zarruq, in his book
the loftiest goal in elucidating Allah's most beautiful names
, says, "Fortifying the heart: That is granted to the one who recites it over every morsel of his food, and Allah knows best."
