=== 78. Al-Mutaali | الْمُتَعَالِي ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-mutaali/

AL-MUTAʿALI MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Mutaʿali
(The Self Exalted)
Al-Mutaʿali Meaning:
The Supremely Exalted, The All Exalted
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Muta’ali (in Arabic: ٱلْمُتَعَالِي), The highest One, and exalted above all creation. He is far beyond any imagination or thought, and the human mind is too narrow to understand his true greatness.
Mentions of Al-Mutaʿali:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root ayn-lam-waw (ع ل و), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to be high, elevated, lofty, to be exalted, to rise up, to ascend, to be higher to exceed, surpass, to overcome, overwhelm to advance, promote, rise above, to mount, be overtop, eminent.
Much of what needs to be said regarding this name has been covered in the name
Al-Aliyy
. Al-Aliyy means "The High" or "The Exalted." Al-Muta'ali is related to this name, but its meaning is intensified. So, He is "The Most High" or the "Supremely Exalted." Dr. Sayyed Mohammad Reza, in his book titled "Divine Names & Attributes In The Holy Qur'an,"
Allah the Exalted is 'Ali because to Him belongs highness and all of its aspects, highness of His Essence, highness of His attributes and esteem, Highness of strength and power. He is the one who has risen over His throne and the who has encompassed the dominion. He is the one who and whom all attributes of greatness, grandness, magnificence, and beauty find perfection and fulfillment."
As a reminder, there are three forms of which we should be aware of Al-Aliyy (The High), Al-Ala (The Most High), and Al-Muta'ali (The Highest). Each successive name goes into a more exaggeratory form. Together they characterize Allah's loftiness, Him being the High above in all respects (i.e., might, wisdom, knowledge, judgment, power, etc.).
إِلَّا
ٱبۡتِغَآءَ
وَجۡهِ
رَبِّهِ
ٱلۡأَعۡلَىٰ
Illab tighaaa’a wajhi rabbihil
a'laa
English Translation:
"But only seeking the countenance of his Lord, Most High."
— (
Qur'an 92:20
)
ذَٰلِكَ
بِأَنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
هُوَ
ٱلۡحَقُّ
وَأَنَّ
مَا
يَدۡعُونَ
مِن
دُونِهِۦ
هُوَ
ٱلۡبَٰطِلُ
وَأَنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
هُوَ
ٱلۡعَلِيُّ
ٱلۡكَبِيرُ
Zaalika bi annal laaha Huwal haqqu wa anna maa yad’oona min doonihee huwal baatilu wa annal laaha Huwal
‘Aliyyul
kabeer
English Translation:
"That is because Allah is the Truth, and that which they call upon other than Him is falsehood, and because Allah is the Most High, the Grand."
— (
Qur'an 22:62
)
لَهُۥ
مَا
فِي
ٱلسَّمَٰوَٰتِ
وَمَا
فِي
ٱلۡأَرۡضِۖ
وَهُوَ
ٱلۡعَلِيُّ
ٱلۡعَظِيمُ
Lahoo maa fis samaa waati wa maa fil ardi wa Huwal
‘Aliyul
‘Azeem
English Translation:
"To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and He is the Most High, the Most Great."
— (
Qur'an 42:4
)
أَمَّن
يَهۡدِيكُمۡ
فِي
ظُلُمَٰتِ
ٱلۡبَرِّ
وَٱلۡبَحۡرِ
وَمَن
يُرۡسِلُ
ٱلرِّيَٰحَ
بُشۡرَۢا
بَيۡنَ
يَدَيۡ
رَحۡمَتِهِۦٓۗ
أَءِلَٰهٞ
مَّعَ
ٱللَّهِۚ
تَعَٰلَى
ٱللَّهُ
عَمَّا
يُشۡرِكُونَ
Ammany-yahdeekum fee zulumaatil barri wal bahri wa many yursilu riyaaha bushran baina yadai rahmatih; ‘a-ilaahun ma’allah;
Ta’aalal
laahu ‘ammaa yushrikoon
English Translation:
"Is He [not best] who guides you through the darknesses of the land and sea and who sends the winds as good tidings before His mercy? Is there a deity with Allah? High is Allah above whatever they associate with Him."
— (
Qur'an 27:63
)
عَٰلِمُ
ٱلۡغَيۡبِ
وَٱلشَّهَٰدَةِ
ٱلۡكَبِيرُ
ٱلۡمُتَعَالِ
‘Aalimul Ghaibi wash shahaadatil Kaabeerul
Muta’aal
English Translation:
"[He is] Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the Grand, the Exalted."
— (
Qur'an 13:9
)
We can beautify every action by doing it in the name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. If we realize His Highness and live to seek His approval, our character will become elevated. Abdullah ibn 'Amr reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
"The one who maintains ties of kinship is not the one who reciprocates. The one who maintains ties of kinship is the one who, when his relatives cut him off, maintains ties of kinship."
[1]
The reason to keep trying is none other but for the sake of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. There is no blame on oneself or the wrongs of the other person. The focus and comfort should come from knowing you're behaving in a manner that is pleasing to Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ.
Reflection:
[1]
Sahih (Al-Albani) Al-Adab Al-Mufrad 68
