=== 87. Al-Jami | الْجَامِعُ ===
Source: https://myislam.org/99-names-of-allah/al-jami/

AL-JAMI MEANING - 99 NAMES OF ALLAH:

Al-Jami
(The Gatherer)
Al-Jami Meaning:
The Unifier, The Uniter.
Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Jaami (in Arabic: ٱلْجَامِعُ), He is The One who has the power to assemble and arrange all that which has been dispersed. He is the one who composes and connects things together.
Mentions of Al-Jami:
From Quran & Hadith

Arabic Root:
From the root jim-mim-ayn (ج م ع), which has the following classical Arabic connotations: to collect, gather up, to congregate, gather together, to draw together, muster, to reconcile, to connect, combine, to form a connection between, union, to compose, arrange, resolve, or settle something.
Among the disputed names:
As we've mentioned in previous names, different scholars have different criteria for what qualifies as a name of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ. Of the 99 names, 81 are explicitly mentioned in the Qur'an. Therefore, there is not one agreed-upon list for the remaining 18 names. Al-Jami is one of those names which is not included by certain scholars. This list includes Ibn al-Wazir, Ibn Hazm, and Ibn al-Uthaymeen. However, others, such as Ibn Arabi, Imam al-Bayhaqi, and al-Ghazali, have included this name in their books of explanations of Asma ul-Husna.
The Gatherer:
The word
Jami
is derived from
Jama'a
, which means to collect or gather. As with all the beautiful names of Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ, Al-Jami is not limited or restricted in any manner. He is The Gatherer. He has the power to combine all things, whether similar or dissimilar, both in space and time. He brought together human beings, infused them with a spirit, and put them on earth. We can go further by analyzing the details of a single creation, the human body. Its composition is complex, consisting of many layers all working as one, circulatory system (blood, veins, arteries...), digestive system (teeth, saliva, stomach...), nervous system (brain, spine, nerves...), and the list goes on. This is the makeup of one of His creations on earth, and we'll avoid discussions of the stars, planets, and galaxies.
أَيَحْسَبُ
ٱلْإِنسَـٰنُ
أَلَّن
نَّجْمَعَ
عِظَامَهُۥ
بَلَىٰ
قَـٰدِرِينَ
عَلَىٰٓ
أَن
نُّسَوِّىَ
بَنَانَهُۥ
بَلْ
يُرِيدُ
ٱلْإِنسَـٰنُ
لِيَفْجُرَ
أَمَامَهُۥ
Ayahsabul insaanu al lan najm’a ‘izaamah Balaa qaadireena ‘alaaa an nusawwiya banaanah Bal yureedul insaanu liyafjura amaamah
English Translation:
"Does man think that We will not assemble his bones? Yes. [We are] Able [even] to proportion his fingertips. But man desires to continue in sin."
— (
Qur'an 75:3-5
)
The gatherer also refers to how on the day of resurrection, we will all be brought back together, awaiting His final judgment.
رَبَّنَآ
إِنَّكَ
جَامِعُ
ٱلنَّاسِ
لِيَوۡمٖ
لَّا
رَيۡبَ
فِيهِۚ
إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ
لَا
يُخۡلِفُ
ٱلۡمِيعَادَ
Rabbanaaa innaka
jaami
un-naasil Yawmil laa raibafeeh; innal laaha laa yukhliful mee’aad (section 1)
English Translation:
"Our Lord, surely You will gather the people for a Day about which there is no doubt. Indeed, Allah does not fail in His promise."
— (
Qur'an 3:9
)
The day of judgment has many names,
Yawm Al-Qiyamah
(The Day of Resurrection),
Yawm Al-Din
(The Day of Recompense),
Yawm Al-Hasrah
(The Day of Regret), and
Yawm Al-Jam'i
(The Day of Collecting Together).
وَكَذَٰلِكَ
أَوۡحَيۡنَآ
إِلَيۡكَ
قُرۡءَانًا
عَرَبِيّٗا
لِّتُنذِرَ
أُمَّ
ٱلۡقُرَىٰ
وَمَنۡ
حَوۡلَهَا
وَتُنذِرَ
يَوۡمَ
ٱلۡجَمۡعِ
لَا
رَيۡبَ
فِيهِۚ
فَرِيقٞ
فِي
ٱلۡجَنَّةِ
وَفَرِيقٞ
فِي
ٱلسَّعِيرِ
Wa kazaalika awhainaaa llaika Qur-aanan ‘Arabiyyal litunzira Ummal Quraa wa man hawlahaa wa tunzira Yawmal Jam’i laa raiba feeh; fareequn fil jannati wa fareequn fissa’eer
English Translation:
"And thus We have revealed to you an Arabic Qur’an that you may warn the Mother of Cities [Makkah] and those around it and warn of the Day of Assembly, about which there is no doubt. A party will be in Paradise and a party in the Blaze."
— (
Qur'an 42:7
)
هَٰذَا
يَوۡمُ
ٱلۡفَصۡلِۖ
جَمَعۡنَٰكُمۡ
وَٱلۡأَوَّلِينَ
Haaza yawmul fasli jama ‘naakum wal awwaleen
English Translation:
"This is the Day of Judgement; We will have assembled you and the former peoples."
— (
Qur'an 77:38
)
وَٱلَّذِينَ
ءَامَنُواْ
وَٱتَّبَعَتۡهُمۡ
ذُرِّيَّتُهُم
بِإِيمَٰنٍ
أَلۡحَقۡنَا
بِهِمۡ
ذُرِّيَّتَهُمۡ
وَمَآ
أَلَتۡنَٰهُم
مِّنۡ
عَمَلِهِم
مِّن
شَيۡءٖۚ
كُلُّ
ٱمۡرِيِٕۭ
بِمَا
كَسَبَ
رَهِينٞ
Wallazeena aamanoo wattaba’at hum zurriyyatuhum bieemaanin alhaqnaa bihim zurriyyatahum wa maaa alatnaahum min ‘amalihim min shai’; kullum ri’im bimaa kasaba raheen
English Translation:
"And those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith – We will join with them their descendants, and We will not deprive them of anything of their deeds. Every person, for what he earned, is retained."
— (
Qur'an 52:21
)
Reflection:
The believer benefits from knowing that Allah سُبْحَٰنَهُۥ وَتَعَٰلَىٰ is Al-Jami, i.e., the gatherer. We realize that our return will be back to Him, and we will be gathered together with all who've walked this earth. Upon reflection on this name, we ask ourselves whether we could say we've been a good representative of being one of Allah's servants? If not, what changes could we make starting today that would move us one step closer to that person?
Imam al-Ghazali mentions our connection to this name is in integrating "the external behavior of his limbs with the inner realities of his heart. The one who unites is one in whom knowledge is perfect and behaviour admirable." To have the outer reflect the inner and to beautify them both.
